Recitation B - Spring 2023 updates (#13)
cs4118/recitations: B-Sockets-ServerTesting/sockets-servertesting.md

web client or server and recieve the text that the opposing computer sends.

Let's first act as a web server. We first tell `netcat` to open a server
connection with `nc -l 10000`, and then in a web browser navigate to the URL
that specifies this server. You can use the domain name `localhost` to specify
the local computer rather than connecting to a remote computer over the
internet. In Chrome, I'll navigate to the URL
`http://localhost:10000/index.html`. `netcat` outputs this:
```
$ nc -l 10000
GET /index.html HTTP/1.1   # GET == method; /index.html == request URI; HTTP/1.0 == version
Host: localhost:10000      # header
Connection: keep-alive     # more headers...
-removed for brevity-
                           # blank newline to indicate end of headers/request
```

To act as a client, we can type our HTTP request manually into netcat rather
than doing it through the web browser. Here, I'll try to send an HTTP request to
the domain name `example.com` on port `80` (the default for HTTP web servers)
for the URI `/index.html`. Note that I specify the `-C` with `netcat` so that
newlines are `\r\n` rather than `\n` -- a requirement of the HTTP protocol. This

> flag may be different depending on your operating system.

Reviewer: Change "I" to "we" for consistency

Reviewer: Flag may be different depending on netcat version (which is related to OS, but can also vary)

```
$ nc -C example.com 80
GET /index.html HTTP/1.0    # GET == method; /index.html == request URI; HTTP/1.1 == version
                            # blank line to specify end of request
HTTP/1.0 200 OK             # start of HTTP response. HTTP/1.0 == version; 200 OK == response status
Accept-Ranges: bytes        # header
Content-Type: text/html     # more headers...
-removed for brevity-
                            # blank newline to indicate end of headers and start of file contents
<!doctype html>
<html>
<head>
    <title>Example Domain</title>
-removed for brevity-
```

Testing your multi-server
---------------------------
### Siege
Siege is a command-line tool that allows you to benchmark your webserver using

> load testing. Given a few parameters, Siege tells you things like the number of
> successful transactions to your website, percent availability, and
> latency/throughput of your server, 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
load testing. Given a few parameters, Siege gives you information about the number of
successful transactions to your website, percent availability, the
latency/throughput of your server, and more.
```

> To install siege, type the following command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To install siege, run the following command:
```

> `sudo apt install siege`

Reviewer: Change to code block ` ``` `

To use siege with your webserver in HW3, run your server and test with the
following command:

> `siege http://<hostname>:<port>/<url>`

Reviewer: same here

> This will run for an infinite amount of time. When you CTRL-C out of the
> command, a list of statistics will be outputted on your terminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will run for an infinite amount of time. When you <kbd>Ctrl</kbd>-<kbd>C</kbd>
out of the command, a list of statistics will be outputted on your terminal.
```

A better way to test with siege is using its options. The `-c` and `-r` options
are particularly useful, as they allow you to specify the number of concurrent
"users" and repetitions per user, respectively. For example, the following
command will create 25 concurrent users that will each attempt to hit the server
50 times, resulting in 1250 hit attempts:

`siege -c 25 -r 50 http://<hostname>:<port>/<URI>`

There are many other options, specified in the siege man page. These include

> `-t`, which specifies how long each user should run (rather than how many

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`-t`, which specifies how long each user should run (as opposed to how many
```

> times), and `-f`, which specifies a file path that contains a list of urls to
> test. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
times), and `-f`, which specifies a file path that contains a list of URLs to
test. 
```

Sockets and Server Testing
===========================
Sockets and HTTP
---------------------------

> ### What is a socket?

Reviewer: add blank line between headers pls

personally I prefer using `#` and `##` over `==` and `--` since it's more consistent across header levels, but this is nitpicky and not smt we're consistent about throughout the course materials

A socket is a software construct used for many modes of communication between
processes. The mode of communication that this recitation will focus on is
network communication. In particular, stream sockets represent an endpoint for
reliable, bidirectional connections such as TCP connections. This allows for two
processes, on separate computers, to communicate over a TCP/IP network
connection.

Sockets have:
- an IP address, to (typically) identify the computer that the socket endpoint
  belongs to
- a port number, to identify which process running on the computer the socket
  endpoint belongs to
- a protocol, such as TCP (reliable) or UDP (unreliable). Stream sockets use
  TCP.

An IP address and port number are both required in order for a computer to
communicate with a specific process on a remote computer. Think about would

> happen if a port number wasn't necessary.

Reviewer: Should this be something more along the lines of "Think about what would happen if we didn't have port numbers"? Not quite sure what this is getting at lol

one end should be visible on the other -- a full duplex stream of data. 

### Sockets API Summary
![](client-server.png) **`socket()`**
- Called by both the client and the server
- On the server-side, a listening socket is created; a connected socket will be
  created later by `accept()`

**`bind()`**
- Usually called only by the server
- Binds the listening socket to a specific port that should be known to the
  client

**`listen()`**
- Called only by the server
- Sets up the listening socket to accept connections

**`accept()`**
- Called only by the server
- By default blocks until a connection request arrives
- Creates and returns a new socket for each client

**`connect()`**
- Called only by the client
- Requires an IP address and port number to connect to
- Attempt to establish connection by reaching out to server

**`send()` and `recv()`**
- Called by both the client and server
- Reads and writes to the other side
- Message boundaries may not be preserved

A TCP client may use these functions as such:
```c
 int fd = socket(...);
 connect(fd, ... /* server address */);

 // Communicate with the server by send()ing from and recv()ing to fd.

>  close(fd);

Reviewer: Get rid of spaces at the beginning of these lines

```

And a TCP server:
```c
 int serv_fd = socket(...);
 bind(serv_fd, ... /* server address */);
 listen(serv_fd, ... /* max pending connections */);

 // use an infinite loop, to continue accepting new incoming clients
 for (;;) {
    int clnt_fd = accept(serv_fd, ...);

    // Communicate with the client by send()ing from and recv()ing to
    // clnt_fd, NOT serv_fd.

    close(clnt_fd);
 }

> ```

Reviewer: Same spacing issue, and add blank lines before and after code block

> **Listening socket vs connected socket** ![](listening-vs-connecting.png) To

Reviewer: Should these be on the same line?

form a bidirectional channel between client and server, three sockets are used:
- The server uses two sockets
  - The listening socket, to accept incoming connections from a client
  - The client socket, which is created when an incoming connection has been
    `accept()`ed. 
- The client uses one socket

>   - The `connect()`ing socket, which reaches out to the server Once the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The `connect()`ing socket, which reaches out to the server. Once the
```

connection has been made, communication can be done between the server's client
socket and the client's connecting socket.

> 

Reviewer: Remove some blank lines here

### HTTP 1.0
HTTP 1.0 is a protocol between a client, typically a web browser, and a server,
typically a web server hosting files such as HTML. It is an outdated version of
the HTTP protocol and simpler than newer versions.

When visiting a website, a URL is specified in the following format:
```
 http://example.com:80/index.html
 ^^^^   ^^^^^^^^^^^ ^^ ^^^^^^^^^^
 |      |           |  |
 |      |           |  URI = /index.html
 |      |           port number = 80
 |      domain name = example.com
 protocol = HTTP
```
Based on the information provided by the user in the URL, a web client will
establish a socket connection with the IP address of the domain name. After
establishing the connection, the two computers exchange text in the form of HTTP
requests:

> - The lient sends a **HTTP request** for a resource on the server
> - The server sends a **HTTP response**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The client sends an **HTTP request** for a resource on the server
- The server sends an **HTTP response**
```

**HTTP request**
- First line: method, request URI, version
    - Ex: "GET /index.html HTTP/1.0\r\n"
- Followed by 0 or more headers
    - Ex: "Host: www.google.com\r\n"
- Followed by an empty line
    - "\r\n"

**HTTP response**
- First line: response status
    - Success: "HTTP/1.0 200 OK\r\n"
    - Failure: "HTTP/1.0 404 Not Found\r\n"
- Followed by 0 or more response headers
- Followed by an empty line
- Followed by the content of the response
    - Ex: image file or HTML file

We can see examples of these two HTTP requests with `netcat`. Since both
`netcat` and web servers/clients connect over sockets, we can pretend to be a

> web client or server and recieve the text that the opposing computer sends.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
web client or server and receive the text that the opposing computer sends.
```

Reviewer: "Opposing" also feels like the wrong word here

Let's first act as a web server. We first tell `netcat` to open a server
connection with `nc -l 10000`, and then in a web browser navigate to the URL

> that specifies this server. You can use the domain name `localhost` to specify

Reviewer: "that specifies this server" is a little awkward

the local computer rather than connecting to a remote computer over the

> internet. In Chrome, I'll navigate to the URL

Reviewer: ```suggestion
internet. In Chrome, we'll navigate to the URL
```

Reviewer: for consistency with earlier usages

Sockets and Server Testing
===========================
Sockets and HTTP
---------------------------
### What is a socket?

A socket is a software construct used for many modes of communication between
processes. The mode of communication that this recitation will focus on is
network communication. In particular, stream sockets represent an endpoint for
reliable, bidirectional connections such as TCP connections. This allows for two
processes, on separate computers, to communicate over a TCP/IP network
connection.

Sockets have:
- an IP address, to (typically) identify the computer that the socket endpoint
  belongs to
- a port number, to identify which process running on the computer the socket
  endpoint belongs to
- a protocol, such as TCP (reliable) or UDP (unreliable). Stream sockets use
  TCP.

An IP address and port number are both required in order for a computer to
communicate with a specific process on a remote computer. Think about would
happen if a port number wasn't necessary.

### The client-server model
The two endpoints in a socket connection serve different roles. One end acts as
a *server*: 

> - It tells the operating system that it should recieve incoming connections on a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It tells the operating system that it should receive incoming connections on a
```

  port number
- It waits for incoming connections

> - When it recieves a connection, it creates a *new socket* for each client which
>   will be used for communication to that client

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When it receives a connection, it creates a *new socket* for each client, which
  will then be used to communicate with that client
```

The other end is a *client*:
- It "connects" to the server using the server’s IP address and the port number

After a client connects to a server, there is bidirectional communication
between the two processes, often with I/O system calls such as `read()` and

> `write()`, or their socket-specific versions `recv()` and `send()`. 

Reviewer: s/versions/variants/ ? versions feels weird here

### Simple socket communication
A simple way to demonstrate the bidirectional and network-based communcation of
sockets is with `netcat`. `netcat` is a bare-bones program to send streams of
binary data over the network.

Imagine we have two computers that can communicate over the internet, with the
IP addresses `clac.cs.columbia.edu` and `clorp.cs.nyu.edu`.

Because of the client-server model, connecting two socket endpoints to each
other is not a symmetrical process. One socket needs to act as the server, while
the other needs to act as a client. You tell `netcat` to act as a server with
the `-l` flag:

> ```bash

Reviewer: add blank line between text and code block

joy@clac.cs.columbia.edu:~$ nc -l 10000
```

The `netcat` program on `clac.cs.columbia.edu` will create a socket and wait for

> connections on the port 10000. To tell `netcat` to act as a client, you supply

Reviewer: ```suggestion
connections on port 10000. To tell `netcat` to act as a client, you supply
```

the IP address of the server and the port number of the socket listening on that
server:
```bash
jeremy@clorp.cs.nyu.edu:~$ nc clac.cs.columbia.edu 10000

> ```

Reviewer: need blank lines around this

Notice the differences between these two commands. The first command only

> requires a port number, and doesn't need to know the IP address of the other

Reviewer: replace "doesn't need to know" with "require"?

computer. The second command requires knowledge of both the IP address -- what

> computer to connect to; and the port number -- which process to connect to on

Reviewer: This formatting is weird... maybe change to "the IP address (which computer to connect to) and the port number (which process to connect to on that computer)"

that computer. This asymmetry is the client-server model.

After the client connects to the server, the server `netcat` process creates a
new socket for bidirectional communicaiton. After the two processes connect
there is no functional difference between client and server. What you type on
one end should be visible on the other -- a full duplex stream of data. 

### Sockets API Summary

> ![](client-server.png) **`socket()`**

Reviewer: Are these supposed to be on the same line?

A TCP client may use these functions as such:
```c
int fd = socket(...);
connect(fd, ... /* server address */);

// Communicate with the server by send()ing from and recv()ing to fd.

close(fd);
```

And a TCP server:

```c
int serv_fd = socket(...);
bind(serv_fd, ... /* server address */);
listen(serv_fd, ... /* max pending connections */);

// use an infinite loop, to continue accepting new incoming clients
for (;;) {
    int clnt_fd = accept(serv_fd, ...);

    // Communicate with the client by send()ing from and recv()ing to
    // clnt_fd, NOT serv_fd.

    close(clnt_fd);
}
```

**Listening socket vs connected socket** 

![](img/listening-vs-connecting.png)

To form a bidirectional channel between client and server, three sockets are used:
- The server uses two sockets
  - The listening socket, to accept incoming connections from a client
  - The client socket, which is created when an incoming connection has been
    `accept()`ed. 
- The client uses one socket
  - The `connect()`ing socket, which reaches out to the server. Once the
connection has been made, communication can be done between the server's client

> socket and the client's connecting socket.

Reviewer: Text here should be indented to match the bullet's level

### HTTP 1.0
HTTP 1.0 is a protocol between a client, typically a web browser, and a server,
typically a web server hosting files such as HTML. It is an outdated version of
the HTTP protocol and simpler than newer versions.

When visiting a website, a URL is specified in the following format:
```
http://example.com:80/index.html
^^^^   ^^^^^^^^^^^ ^^ ^^^^^^^^^^
|      |           |  |
|      |           |  URI = /index.html
|      |           port number = 80
|      domain name = example.com
protocol = HTTP
```

> Based on the information provided by the user in the URL, a web client will

Reviewer: add blank lines surrounding this

either a web client or server. 

Let's first act as a web server. We tell `netcat` to open a server connection
with `nc -l 10000`, and then in a web browser navigate to the URL with the
domain name of this server. We can use the domain name `localhost` to specify
the local computer rather than connecting to a remote computer over the
internet. In Chrome, we'll navigate to the URL
`http://localhost:10000/index.html`. `netcat` outputs this:

```
$ nc -l 10000
GET /index.html HTTP/1.1   # GET == method; /index.html == request URI; HTTP/1.1 == version
Host: localhost:10000      # header
Connection: keep-alive     # more headers...
-removed for brevity-
                           # blank newline to indicate end of headers/request
```

To act as a client, we can type our HTTP request manually into netcat rather
than doing it through the web browser. Here, we try to send an HTTP request to
the domain name `example.com` on port `80` (the default for HTTP web servers)
for the URI `/index.html`. Note that we specify the `-C` with `netcat` so that
newlines are `\r\n` rather than `\n` -- a requirement of the HTTP protocol. This
flag may vary depending on `netcat` version.

```

> $ nc -C example.com 80

Reviewer: this should have `console` style syntax highlighting

Reviewer: as should the `nc -l 10000` example above this

GET /index.html HTTP/1.0    # GET == method; /index.html == request URI; HTTP/1.1 == version
                            # blank line to specify end of request
HTTP/1.0 200 OK             # start of HTTP response. HTTP/1.0 == version; 200 OK == response status
Accept-Ranges: bytes        # header
Content-Type: text/html     # more headers...
-removed for brevity-
                            # blank newline to indicate end of headers and start of file contents
<!doctype html>             # HTML contents
<html>
<head>
    <title>Example Domain</title>
-removed for brevity-
```

Testing your multi-server

> ---------------------------

Reviewer: Change this header style as well for consistency?

### Siege
Siege is a command-line tool that allows you to benchmark your webserver using
load testing. Given a few parameters, Siege gives you information about the
number of successful transactions to your website, percent availability, the
latency/throughput of your server, and more.

To install siege, run the following command:

> ```sudo apt install siege```

Reviewer: this should be

\`\`\`
sudo ...
\`\`\`

same with the next two siege commands below

- It tells the operating system that it should receive incoming connections on a
  port number
- It waits for incoming connections
- When it receives a connection, it creates a *new socket* for each client,
  which will then be used to communicate with that client

The other end is a *client*:
- It "connects" to the server using the server’s IP address and the port number

After a client connects to a server, there is bidirectional communication
between the two processes, often with I/O system calls such as `read()` and
`write()`, or their socket-specific variants `recv()` and `send()`. 

### Sockets with netcat
A simple way to demonstrate the bidirectional and network-based communcation of
sockets is with `netcat`. `netcat` is a bare-bones program to send streams of
binary data over the network.

Imagine we have two computers that can communicate over the internet, with the
IP addresses `clac.cs.columbia.edu` and `clorp.cs.nyu.edu`.

Because of the client-server model, connecting two socket endpoints to each
other is not a symmetrical process. One socket needs to act as the server, while
the other needs to act as a client. You tell `netcat` to act as a server with
the `-l` flag:

> ```bash

Reviewer 2: nit: i think these should be console

    // clnt_fd, NOT serv_fd.

    close(clnt_fd);
}
```

### Listening socket vs connected socket
![](img/listening-vs-connecting.png)

To form a bidirectional channel between client and server, three sockets are used:
- The server uses two sockets
  - The listening socket, to accept incoming connections from a client
  - The client socket, which is created when an incoming connection has been
    `accept()`ed. 
- The client uses one socket
  - The `connect()`ing socket, which reaches out to the server. Once the
  connection has been made, communication can be done between the server's client
  socket and the client's connecting socket.

### HTTP 1.0
HTTP 1.0 is a protocol between a client, typically a web browser, and a server,
typically a web server hosting files such as HTML. It is an outdated version of
the HTTP protocol and simpler than newer versions.

When visiting a website, a URL is specified in the following format:

```
http://example.com:80/index.html
^^^^   ^^^^^^^^^^^ ^^ ^^^^^^^^^^
|      |           |  |
|      |           |  URI = /index.html
|      |           port number = 80
|      domain name = example.com
protocol = HTTP
```

> 

Reviewer 2: big fan of this, nice

Author: yoinked it from John lol

Based on the information provided by the user in the URL, a web client will
establish a socket connection with the IP address of the domain name. After
establishing the connection, the two computers exchange text in the form of HTTP
requests:

- The client sends an **HTTP request** for a resource on the server
- The server sends an **HTTP response**

**HTTP request**
- First line: method, request URI, version
    - Ex: "GET /index.html HTTP/1.0\r\n"
- Followed by 0 or more headers
    - Ex: "Host: www.google.com\r\n"
- Followed by an empty line
    - "\r\n"

**HTTP response**
- First line: response status
    - Success: "HTTP/1.0 200 OK\r\n"
    - Failure: "HTTP/1.0 404 Not Found\r\n"
- Followed by 0 or more response headers

> - Followed by an empty line

Reviewer 2: same as above, add "- \r\n" under this

- Followed by the content of the response
    - Ex: image file or HTML file

We can see the contents of real HTTP requests using `netcat` by pretending to be
either a web client or server. 

> Let's first act as a web server. We tell `netcat` to open a server connection

Reviewer 2: maybe im tweaking, but i am worried that this example might confuse students. i think it's great to use nc -l to view how a client request comes in, but i am not sure if it is clear enough that nc cant actually be a real web server since it cant understand HTTP requests... like if a student tries this, their browser will just hang

Author: I added a sentence about it but lmk if you think there needs to be more

with `nc -l 10000`, and then in a web browser navigate to the URL with the
domain name of this server. We can use the domain name `localhost` to specify
the local computer rather than connecting to a remote computer over the
internet. In Chrome, we'll navigate to the URL
`http://localhost:10000/index.html`. `netcat` outputs this:

```console
$ nc -l 10000
GET /index.html HTTP/1.1   # GET == method; /index.html == request URI; HTTP/1.1 == version
Host: localhost:10000      # header
Connection: keep-alive     # more headers...
-removed for brevity-
                           # blank newline to indicate end of headers/request
```

To act as a client, we can type our HTTP request manually into netcat rather
than doing it through the web browser. Here, we try to send an HTTP request to
the domain name `example.com` on port `80` (the default for HTTP web servers)
for the URI `/index.html`. Note that we specify the `-C` with `netcat` so that
newlines are `\r\n` rather than `\n` -- a requirement of the HTTP protocol. This

> flag may vary depending on `netcat` version.

Reviewer 2: ...version -- check `man netcat` or whatever the man page is

outputted on your terminal.

A better way to test with siege is using its options. The `-c` and `-r` options
are particularly useful, as they allow you to specify the number of concurrent
"users" and repetitions per user, respectively. For example, the following
command will create 25 concurrent users that will each attempt to hit the server
50 times, resulting in 1250 hit attempts:

`siege -c 25 -r 50 http://<hostname>:<port>/<URI>`

There are many other options, specified in the siege man page. These include
`-t`, which specifies how long each user should run (as opposed to how many
times), and `-f`, which specifies a file path that contains a list of URLs to
test. 

### Additional guidance on testing/benchmarking
When grading, we're going to test your implementation using a mix of manual
connections (e.g. using tools like netcat) and stress testers like siege.

You should use `netcat` to make sure that basic functionality works and that you
can indeed have more than 1 connection to the server at any given time. `netcat`
is nice because it allows you to establish a connection and then prompts you for
the data to send. You should also use `netcat` to test that your cleanup logic

> is correct, as you can control exactly when connections start/terminate.

Reviewer 2: add something like..

your server should be resilient to client failures -- use netcat to simulate client disconnecting at various points during the transaction and make sure that your server can gracefully handle these scenarios

"users" and repetitions per user, respectively. For example, the following
command will create 25 concurrent users that will each attempt to hit the server
50 times, resulting in 1250 hit attempts:

```
siege -c 25 -r 50 http://<hostname>:<port>/<URI>
```

There are many other options, specified in the siege man page. These include
`-t`, which specifies how long each user should run (as opposed to how many
times), and `-f`, which specifies a file path that contains a list of URLs to
test. 

### Additional guidance on testing/benchmarking
When grading, we're going to test your implementation using a mix of manual
connections (e.g. using tools like netcat) and stress testers like siege.

You should use `netcat` to make sure that basic functionality works and that you
can indeed have more than 1 connection to the server at any given time. `netcat`
is nice because it allows you to establish a connection and then prompts you for
the data to send. You should also use `netcat` to test that your cleanup logic
is correct, as you can control exactly when connections start/terminate.

Your server should be resilient to any client failure. `netcat` is a useful tool

> to test these kinds of failures, as you can simulate bad requests or
> disconnecting at various points during the transaction. Your server should be
> able to gracefully handle these scenarios -- under no condition should you
> server crash because of a client failure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to test these kinds of failures, as you can simulate bad requests or
disconnections at various points during the transaction. Your server should be
able to gracefully handle these scenarios -- under no condition should your
server crash because of a client failure.
```

Author: typing is so hard

command will create 25 concurrent users that will each attempt to hit the server
50 times, resulting in 1250 hit attempts:

> ```

Reviewer 2: nit: console

Reviewer: this one shouldn't be console - console is for when you have a prompt or the command's output
It could be `sh` or `bash`, but it wouldn't change much for this one
